>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, APRIL 2: THE SENATE
GETS READY TO VOTE ON SUPREME
COURT NOMINEE NEIL GORSUCH.
PRESIDENT TRUMP PREPARES TO HOST
THE PRESIDENT OF EGYPT.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
THE RISKS OF BREXIT ON BRITISH
TERRITORIES OUTSIDE THE U.K.
NEXT ON "PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE PROCESS TO FILL THE SUPREME
COURT VACANCY LEFT BY THE DEATH
OF JUSTICE ANTONIN SCALIA 14
MONTHS AGO TAKES A STEP FORWARD
TOMORROW.
THE NOMINATION OF JUDGE NEIL
GORSUCH GETS A VOTE IN THE
SENATE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE THAT
QUESTIONED HIM LAST MONTH.
THE COMMITTEE IS EXPECTED TO
APPROVE THE NOMINATION ALONG
PARTISAN LINES, WITH REPUBLICANS
HAVING THE MAJORITY, AS THEY DO
IN THE WHOLE SENATE, WITH 52 OF
100 SEATS.
TODAY, SENATOR JOE DONNELLY OF
INDIANA JOINED HEIDI HEITKAMP OF
SOUTH DAKOTA AND JOE MANCHIN OF
WEST VIRGINIA AS THE ONLY
DEMOCRATS TO SAY THEY'LL VOTE
FOR GORSUCH.
ALL THREE ARE FROM STATES WON BY
MISTER TRUMP.
REPUBLICAN SENATE MAJORITY
LEADER MITCH McCONNELL PREDICTED
THE NOMINATION WILL PASS.
>> WHAT I'M TELLING YOU IS THAT
JUDGE GORSUCH IS GOING TO BE
CONFIRMED.
THE WAY IN WHICH THAT OCCURS IS
IN THE HANDS OF THE DEMOCRATIC
MINORITY, AND I THINK DURING THE
COURSE OF THE WEEK WE WILL FIND
OUT EXACTLY HOW THIS WILL END,
BUT IT WILL END WITH HIS
CONFIRMATION.
>> Sreenivasan: UNLESS
REPUBLICANS CAN GET 60 VOTES,
DEMOCRATS ARE THREATENING TO
FILIBUSTER THE CONFIRMATION; IN
PART AS PAYBACK FOR THE SENATE'S
REFUSAL TO HOLD HEARINGS ON
JUDGE MERRICK GARLAND LAST YEAR.
HE WAS PRESIDENT OBAMA'S PICK TO
REPLACE SCALIA.
>> IT LOOKS LIKE GORSUCH WILL
NOT REACH THE 60-VOTE MARGIN SO
INSTEAD OF CHANGING THE RULES,
WHICH IS UP TO MITCH McCONNELL
AND THE REPUBLICAN MAJORITY, WHY
DOESN'T PRESIDENT TRUMP,
DEMOCRATS AND REPUBLICANS IN THE
SENATE, SIT DOWN AND TRY TO COME
UP WITH A MAINSTREAM NOMINEE?
>> Sreenivasan: IN AN INTERVIEW
ONLY DAYS BEFORE HIS FIRST
MEETING WITH CHINESE PRESIDENT
XI JINPING, PRESIDENT TRUMP
WARNED TODAY THE U.S. IS
PREPARED TO ACT WITHOUT CHINA
AGAINST NORTH KOREA'S NUCLEAR
WEAPONS PROGRAM.
MISTER TRUMP TOLD "THE FINANCIAL
TIMES," IN PART, "IF CHINA IS
NOT GOING TO SOLVE NORTH KOREA,
WE WILL."
THE CHINESE PRESIDENT IS
SCHEDULED TO VISIT MISTER TRUMP
AT THE PRESIDENT'S HOME IN PALM
BEACH, FLORIDA, THIS COMING
THURSDAY AND FRIDAY.
SENATE MAJORITY LEADER MITCH
McCONNELL TODAY REJECTED CALLS
FOR AN INDEPENDENT COMMISSION TO
INVESTIGATE ALLEGED RUSSIAN
MEDDLING IN THE PRESIDENTIAL
CAMPAIGN OR POSSIBLE COLLUSION
WITH ANY TRUMP ASSOCIATES.
McCONNELL SAID HE'S CONFIDENT
THE F.B.I. AND THE CONGRESSIONAL
INTELLIGENCE COMMITTEES CAN
HANDLE THE PROBE.
ASKED TODAY WHETHER HE'S SEEN
ANY EVIDENCE TO SUPPORT
PRESIDENT TRUMP'S ACCUSATION
THAT THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
ORDERED ANY WIRETAPS OF TRUMP
TOWER, SENATOR MCCONNELL SAID,
"NO."
FORMER TRUMP NATIONAL SECURITY
ADVISER MICHAEL FLYNN, WHO HAS
VOLUNTEERED TO TESTIFY IN THE
CONGRESSIONAL RUSSIA PROBES IF
GRANTED IMMUNITY FROM
PROSECUTION, INITIALLY OMITTED
THOUSANDS OF DOLLARS IN SPEAKING
FEES EARNED FROM RUSSIAN
ENTITIES ON HIS WHITE HOUSE
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE FORM.
FLYNN NOTED THE PAYMENTS, FROM
BEFORE HE JOINED THE
ADMINISTRATION, IN A REVISED
FORM RELEASED BY THE WHITE HOUSE
YESTERDAY.
FLYNN WAS FORCED TO RESIGN IN
FEBRUARY AFTER MISLEADING VICE
PRESIDENT PENCE ABOUT THE
CONTENT OF HIS PHONE CALLS LAST
DECEMBER WITH THE RUSSIAN
AMBASSADOR.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
ADMINISTRATOR SCOTT PRUITT, IN A
DEPARTURE FROM PAST REMARKS,
ACKNOWLEDGED TODAY HUMAN
ACTIVITY IS INDEED CONTRIBUTING
TO GLOBAL WARMING.
>> THERE'S A WARMING TREND, THE
CLIMATE IS CHANGING, AND HUMAN
ACTIVITY CONTRIBUTES TO THAT
CHANGE IN SOME MEASURE.
THE REAL ISSUE IS HOW MUCH WE
CONTRIBUTE TO IT AND MEASURING
THAT WITH PRECISION.
>> Sreenivasan: PRUITT, WHOSE
APPOINTMENT WAS FOUGHT BY
ENVIRONMENTAL ACTIVISTS, SAID
LAST MONTH THAT CARBON DIOXIDE
EMISSIONS FROM BURNING FOSSIL
FUELS WERE NOT A, "PRIMARY
CONTRIBUTOR" TO GLOBAL WARMING.
CHICAGO POLICE HAVE MADE THEIR
FIRST ARREST FOR THE ALLEGED
GANG RAPE OF A 15-YEAR-OLD GIRL,
WHICH WAS STREAMED LIVE ON
FACEBOOK TWO WEEKS AGO.
POLICE SAY THE ATTACK INVOLVED
UP TO SIX MALES AND WAS WATCHED
BY APPROXIMATELY 40 PEOPLE, NONE
OF WHOM CALLED THE AUTHORITIES.
POLICE YESTERDAY ARRESTED A 14-
YEAR-OLD BOY WHO THEY DESCRIBE
AS "ONE OF THE OFFENDERS IN THE
VIDEO."
THE VIDEO WAS BROUGHT TO THE
POLICE BY THE VICTIM'S MOTHER.
THE TEEN HAS BEEN CHARGED WITH
AGGRAVATED CRIMINAL SEXUAL
ASSAULT, AS WELL AS
MANUFACTURING AND DISSEMINATING
CHILD PORNOGRAPHY.
TODAY, POLICE OBTAINED AN ARREST
WARRANT FOR ANOTHER TEEN, AND
SAY THEY'RE WORKING WITH
FACEBOOK TO IDENTIFY OTHER
SUSPECTS.
HOW MIGHT PRESIDENT TRUMP'S
PROPOSED BUDGET CUTS TO THE
SUPERFUND PROGRAM AFFECT THE
CLEANUP OF AMERICA'S TOXIC WASTE
SITES?
VISIT pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: EGYPTIAN
PRESIDENT ABDEL FATTAH AL-SISI
WILL VISIT THE WHITE HOUSE
TOMORROW.
THE ADMINISTRATION HAS SAID
PRESIDENT TRUMP IS LOOKING TO
REBOOT THE BILATERAL
RELATIONSHIP AND BUILD ON THE
CONNECTION THE TWO PRESIDENTS
ESTABLISHED WHEN THEY FIRST MET
IN NEW YORK LAST YEAR.
THE VISIT RAISES QUESTIONS ABOUT
U.S. FOREIGN AID TO EGYPT AND
AL-SISI'S HUMAN RIGHTS RECORD
SINCE HE OVERTHREW EGYPT'S FIRST
DEMOCRATICALLY-ELECTED PRESIDENT
IN 2013."
NEW YORK TIMES" WHITE HOUSE
CORRESPONDENT PETER BAKER JOINS
ME NOW FROM WASHINGTON FOR A
PREVIEW.
YOU HAD A CHANCE TO SIT DOWN
WITH OFFICIALS IN THE WHITE
HOUSE.
FIRST OF ALL, REGARDLESS OF WHAT
HAPPENS AT THE MEETING, THE VERY
ACT OF THE U.S. PRESIDENT
MEETING HIM AT THE WHITE HOUSE,
THAT'S KIND OF A WIN FOR EGYPT
RIGHT THERE?
>> WELL, THE PICTURE IS WHAT
PRESIDENT SISI WANTS MORE THAN
ANYTHING, THAT ALONG WITH THE
MONEY, OF COURSE.
BUT THE PICTURE IS IMPORTANT, A
PICTURE OF HIM WITH THE
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES,
IN THE OVAL OFFICE, IN THE WHITE
HOUSE, SOMETHING NO EGYPTIAN
PRESIDENT HAS HAD SINCE 2009.
PRESIDENT OBAMA, YOU KNOW, HE
WENT BACK AND FORTH ON HOW HARD
TO PUSH ON HUMAN RIGHTS BUT HE
KEPT A DISTANCE TO PRESIDENT
SISI, NEVER INVITED HIM TO THE
WHITE HOUSE.
THIS IS SOMETHING AS YOU SAY AS
A VICTORY FOR PRESIDENT SISI TO
COME AND BE WITH THE PRESIDENT
OF THE UNITED STATES.
>> LET'S TALK ABOUT THE PEOPLE
HE OVERTHREW TO TAKE THE SPOT,
THE MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD, EGYPT
CONSIDERS THEM BASICALLY A
TERRORIST ORGANIZATION, HE WANTS
THE WORLD TO SEE THEM THAT WAY
AS WELL.
WHAT IS THE LIKELIHOOD THE U.S.
MOVES IN THAT DIRECTION.
>> WHEN PRESIDENT SIS AYE-- SISI
MET WITH PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
ADMINISTRATION, THEY BROUGHT UP
YOU NEED TO DIGS NATION THE
MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD AS A
TERRORIST O.
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
CONSISTENTLY REFUSED.
THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION IS
DEBATING IT, THEY ARE NOT SURE.
THERE ARE PEOPLE IN THE
ADMINISTRATION AGREE THAT THEY
THINK THEY ARE LIKE RADICAL
ISLAMIC GROUPS LIKE THE ISLAMIC
STATE, LIKE AL-QAEDA LIKE SHE
BAB.
BUT THERE ARE MANY OTHERS IN AND
OUTSIDE THE ADMINISTRATION WHO
SAY YOU SHOULDN'T CONFLATE THE
TWO.
THEY ARE MORE MODERATE.
THEY HAVE OFFICIALLY RENOUNCED
VIOLENCE AND I
MORE-- ORGANIZATION ANYWAY THAT
WOULD CAUSE ALL SORTS OF
UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES IF YOU
CALL THEM A TERRORIST
ORGANIZATION.
BECAUSE SUDDENLY YOU WOULDN'T BE
ALLOWED IT DEAL WITH PEOPLE IN
GOVERNMENTS IN PLACES LINE
TUNISIA AND OTHER PLACES.
>> AND EGYPT HAS CRACKED DOWN
HARD TO PUT IT MILDLY ON THE
MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD.
AND YOUR PIECE RECENTLY TALKED
ABOUT THEIR HUMAN-RIGHTS RECORD.
A LOT OF PEOPLE ARE PUSHING THE
UNITED STATES TO TAKE A STAND ON
IT.
WHAT IS THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION
GOING TO DO.
>> ACCORDING TO HUMAN RIGHTS
WATCH, THEN TENS OF THOUSANDS OF
PEOPLE HAVE BEEN PUT IN PRISON
BY PRESIDENT SISI'S
ADMINISTRATION FOR LARGELY
POLITICAL REASON, THE MUSLIM
BROTHERHOOD BUT ALSO SOME PEOPLE
NOT RELATED TO THEM, INCLUDING A
FEW AMERICANS.
WHAT THE TRUMP WHITE HOUSE IS
SAYING IS LOOK, HUMAN RIGHTS
ARE IMPORTANT TO US.
WE ARE GOING TO RAISE IT BUT
WE'LL IS DO IT IN PRIVATE.
WE NEED A CONSTRUCTIVE WAY TO
APPROACH.
THIS THE CRITICS OUTSIDE ARE
SAYING IF YOU DON'T RAISE IT
PUBLICLY IT SENDS A SIGNAL TO
NOT JUST EGYPT BUT THE WHOLE
REGION THAT IT'S NOT IMPORTANT
TO YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: SPEAKING OF
THE REGION, THE KING OF JORDAN
IS SUPPOSED TO VISIT ON
WEDNESDAY.
THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION HAS
SAID THEIR PRIORITY IS TO FIGHT
ISIS N THAT CONTEXT WHAT ABOUT
THE AID THE UNITED STATES GIVES
TO EGYPT.
DOES THAT INCREASE OR DECREASE
WITH THE-- IS.
>> WE HAVE SEEN PRESIDENT TRUMP
SENT CONGRESS A BUDGET PROPOSAL
THAT CUTS FOREIGN AID VERY
DRASTICALLY, VERY DRAMATICALLY.
AND THEY HAVE SAID OTHER THAN
ISRAEL BASICALLY EVERYBODY'S AID
PACKAGE IS ON THE TABLE.
WELL, SECOND TO ISRAEL IS EGYPT.
1.3 BILLION A YEAR IN MILITARY
AID.
BUT THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION IS
SAYING LOOK, WE'RE GOING TO GIVE
THEM ENOUGH MONEY BUT WE'RE NOT
TELLING THEM HOW MUCH.
SO THE EGYPTIANS ARE NERVOUS
ABOUT THAT, THAT IS ONE OF THE
TOP PRIORITIES THAT PRESIDENT
SISI HAS IN COMING TO WASHINGTON
TO SEE IF HE CAN'T PRESERVE
THEIR GENEROUS AID LEVELS
THEY'VE HAD GOING BACK TO THE
CAMP DAVID ACCORDS TO IN THE
1970 WEST BETTER BAKER JOINING
US IN WASHINGTON, THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> THANK, GOOD TALKING TO YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: LAST WEEK,
BRITISH PRIME MINISTER THERESA
MAY BEGAN THE FORMAL PROCESS OF
THE UNITED KINGDOM EXITING THE
28-NATION EUROPEAN UNION, NINE
MONTHS AFTER BRITISH VOTERS
CHOSE TO BECOME THE FIRST
COUNTRY EVER TO LEAVE THE E.U.
MANY BRITISH CITIZENS ARE
WORRIED ABOUT LIKELY CHANGES TO
TRAVEL RULES AND TRADE
REGULATIONS THAT COULD AFFECT
THEIR LIVES AT HOME AND ABROAD.
ONE SUCH PLACE IS GIBRALTAR, A
THREE-SQUARE-MILE SLIVER OF LAND
ATTACHED TO SPAIN.
IT'S MORE THAN A THOUSAND MILES
FROM LONDON AND HAS BEEN UNDER
BRITISH RULE SINCE 1704.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT AMY GUTTMAN WENT
THERE TO REPORT ON BREXIT
JITTERS.
>> Reporter: GIBRALTAR IS WHERE
THE ATLANTIC OCEAN MEETS THE
MEDITERRANEAN SEA.
TOURISTS FLOCK HERE TO STAND AT
THE TOP OF THE ROCK, 1,400 FEET
ABOVE SEA LEVEL, WITH TUNNELS
CARVED INTO IT WHICH HOUSED
ALLIED TROOPS DURING WORLD WAR
TWO.
FOR CENTURIES, THIS PENINSULA
JUTTING OUT OF SPAIN'S SOUTHERN
COAST HAS BEEN A STRATEGIC
MILITARY AND TRADING POST.
TODAY, IT'S THE ONLY BRITISH
TERRITORY ON THE EUROPEAN
CONTINENT.
THE MILD CLIMATE, RELAXED
LIFESTYLE, AND MIX OF LANGUAGES
MAKE GIBRALTAR FEEL CULTURALLY A
LOT LIKE NEIGHBORING SPAIN.
WHILE 30,000 PEOPLE LIVE IN
GIBRALTAR, 13,000 SPANIARDS AND
OTHER EUROPEAN NATIONALS COMMUTE
TO WORK HERE EVERY DAY.
MOST PARK THEIR CARS ON THE
SPANISH SIDE AND WALK ACROSS AN
AREA KNOWN AS "THE FRONTIER."
GEORGE BASSADONE EMPLOYS 70
SPANISH WORKERS CONVERTING SUV'S
INTO AMBULANCES USED BY THE
UNITED NATIONS AND AID
ORGANIZATIONS ALL OVER THE
WORLD.
>> THE WORK THAT WE DO IS VERY
SPECIALIZED, INVOLVING A LOT OF
ELECTRONICS, MECHANICAL WORK.
SO, WE TEND TO FIND THAT
EXPERTISE IN SPAIN.
>> Reporter: HIS BUSINESS IS
DEPENDENT ON ONE OF THE
CORNERSTONES OF THE EUROPEAN
UNION, FREE MOVEMENT OF PEOPLE
AND GOODS ACROSS OPEN BORDERS.
GIBRALTAR IMPORTS ALMOST
EVERYTHING FROM ITS FOOD TO
TIMBER OVER ITS ONE MILE LAND
BORDER WITH SPAIN.
BASSADONE WAS AMONG THE 96% OF
GIBRALTAR RESIDENTS WHO VOTED TO
REMAIN IN THE E.U. IN LAST
YEAR'S REFERENDUM, WHEN THE
OVERALL MAJORITY OF VOTERS IN
THE UNITED KINGDOM VOTED TO
LEAVE.
>> THE BIGGEST FEAR WE HAVE IS A
POTENTIAL CLOSURE OF THE BORDER.
WE WOULD HAVE TO REEVALUATE OUR
SPANISH WORKFORCE AND LOOK AT
POSSIBLY GETTING RID OF THE
MAJORITY OF OUR SPANISH WORKERS
AND TRYING TO TRAIN UP LOCALS,
WHICH WOULD BE VERY DISRUPTIVE
AND TAKE UP A HUGE AMOUNT OF
TIME TO DO.
>> Reporter: ARE THERE LOCALS
WHO WANT TO DO THESE JOBS?
>> THAT WOULD BE ONE OF THE BIG
CHALLENGES FINDING 70-PLUS
TECHNICIANS AND ENGINEERS THAT
ARE ABLE TO DO THIS KIND OF
WORK.
ONE OF OUR UNIQUE SELLING POINTS
IS TO REACT QUICKLY TO
INTERNATIONAL DEMAND AND
DISASTERS IN DIFFERENT PARTS OF
THE WORLD.
HAVING THAT AGILITY AND
FLEXIBILITY IS VERY MUCH BASED
ON THE EXISTING WORKFORCE THAT
WE HAVE.
>> Reporter: JUST AS GIBRALTAR
DEPENDS ON SPANISH WORKERS FOR
40% OF ITS WORKFORCE, RESIDENTS
OF THE CLOSEST SPANISH CITY, LA
LINEA DE CONCEPCION, DEPEND ON
JOBS IN GIBRALTAR.
DESPITE THAT, MORE THAN A THIRD
OF LA LINEA'S POPULATION IS
UNEMPLOYED, LIKE MARGA SANCHEZ.
SHE'S WORRIED THAT UNCERTAINTY
ABOUT BREXIT COULD MAKE IT EVEN
MORE DIFFICULT TO FIND A JOB.
>> THE PEOPLE ARE TRYING TO SELL
THEIR HOUSES, BUT THEY DON'T
FIND BUYERS, BECAUSE NOBODY
WANTS TO INVEST RIGHT NOW.
WE ARE IN LIMBO, BASICALLY.
>> Reporter: WOULD IT BE
POSSIBLE FOR YOU AND YOUR
PARTNER TO SUPPORT YOURSELVES
WITH JOBS IN LA LINEA?
>> THERE ARE NO JOBS IN LA
LINEA.
WE ONLY HAVE GIBRALTAR AS OUR
MAIN FACTORY.
EITHER YOU WORK THERE OR YOU
HAVE TO FIND ANOTHER WAY TO
SURVIVE.
>> Reporter: LA LINEA'S ECONOMY
ALSO GETS A BIG BOOST FROM THE
$175-MILLION GIBRALTAR RESIDENTS
SPEND EVERY YEAR IN SPAIN.
>> 150 POUNDS, PLEASE.
>> Reporter: ON SHOPPING,
RESTAURANTS, AND SERVICES LIKE
THIS AUTO BODY REPAIR SHOP,
WHERE 40% OF THE CUSTOMERS COME
FROM OVER THE BORDER.
LA LINEA MAYOR JUAN FRANCO SAYS
HIS CONSTITUENTS AND GIBRALTAR
RESIDENTS ARE ALREADY FEELING
ONE NEGATIVE EFFECT FROM BREXIT,
THE DECLINE IN THE VALUE OF THE
BRITISH POUND, GIBRALTAR'S
CURRENCY.
>> (translated): NOW THE POUND
HAS A RATE OF ABOUT 15% LOWER
THAN SIX OR SEVEN MONTHS AGO.
THAT AFFECTS THE SALARIES OF THE
SPANISH WORKERS AND EUROPEANS.
IT'S LIKE A CHAIN EFFECT,
BECAUSE PEOPLE SPEND LESS MONEY
IN LA LINEA.
>> Reporter: JUAN JOSE UCEDA,
WHO REPRESENTS A UNION FOR
SPANISH WORKERS EMPLOYED IN
GIBRALTAR, ESTIMATES 25% OF LA
LINEA'S ECONOMY COMES FROM THE
NEIGHBORING PENINSULA.
>> WE EXPORT A LOT OF STUFF TO
GIBRALTAR.
WHAT IS GOING TO HAPPEN WITH ALL
THE GROCERIES AND THE FRUITS AND
VEGETABLES AND SHOES AND OTHER
THINGS WE EXPORT FROM SPAIN TO
U.K.?
>> Reporter: YOU CAN SEE THOSE
EXPORTS MOVING EVERY DAY BEFORE
DAWN, AS 300 TRUCKS LINE UP ON
THE SPANISH SIDE OF THE BORDER
WAITING FOR CUSTOMS CHECKS
BEFORE MAKING DELIVERIES TO
WAREHOUSES IN GIBRALTAR.
>> THE FRONTIER IS VERY
IMPORTANT.
IT NEEDS TO BE OPEN FOR
GIBRALTAR TO SURVIVE, I THINK.
>> Reporter: IDAN GREENBERG OWNS
A CAFE AND BAKERY IN GIBRALTAR.
HE SAYS IT WOULD BE IMPOSSIBLE
TO RUN HIS BUSINESS WITHOUT
THOSE DAILY DELIVERIES.
>> YOU NEED CHICKPEAS FROM SPAIN
AND TAHINI, WHICH HAPPENS TO BE
IMPORTED VIA LONDON OVER ROAD
AND COMING OVER THE BORDER WITH
SPAIN.
>> Reporter: A SHORT AIRSTRIP
AND A BORDER CROSSING ARE ALL
THAT SEPARATE THE PENINSULA OF
GIBRALTAR FROM MAINLAND SPAIN.
THE RELATIONSHIP WITH ITS
NEAREST NEIGHBOR HAS BEEN
TEMPESTUOUS IN THE PAST, AT
TIMES MAKING GIBRALTAR
PRACTICALLY AN ISLAND.
FOR DECADES, SPAIN HAS EXERTED
PRESSURE TO REGAIN SOVEREIGNTY
OVER GIBRALTAR, FOR EXAMPLE,
INTENTIONALLY SLOWING PASSPORT
AND VEHICLE CHECKS AT ITS
BORDER, LEADING TO TRAFFIC JAMS
OF UP TO 12 HOURS.
THE WORST CONFRONTATION CAME IN
1969, WHEN SPANISH DICTATOR
FRANCISCO FRANCO CLOSED THE
BORDER ENTIRELY TO ASSERT
SPAIN'S CLAIM OVER THE
TERRITORY.
THE BORDER REMAINED SHUT FOR 15
YEARS, CAUSING MASSIVE JOB
LOSSES FOR LA LINEA RESIDENTS
WHO WORKED IN GIBRALTAR AND
DIVIDING FAMILIES.
>> ALMOST A THIRD OF THE
POPULATION HAD TO LEAVE.
IT WAS REALLY DIFFICULT FOR US
TO SURVIVE PSYCHOLOGICALLY THAT
SITUATION.
MANY PEOPLE OF GIBRALTAR AND LA
LINEA ARE MIXED.
THEY ARE FAMILIES.
THEY ARE GRANDPARENTS HERE THAT
GO THERE TO GIBRALTAR TO MEET
THEIR GRANDCHILDREN OR VICE
VERSA.
>> Reporter: ED MACQUISTEN, WHO
HEADS THE GIBRALTAR CHAMBER OF
COMMERCE, SAYS THE HARDENING OF
THE BORDER WOULD ALSO HURT
GIBRALTAR'S ECONOMY.
>> THERE ARE A NUMBER OF PEOPLE
WHO LIVE IN THIS TOWN WHO HAVE
EXPERIENCED THAT BEFORE, WHEN
THE SPANISH GOVERNMENT SHUT THE
FRONTIER IN 1969.
FOR THE BUSINESS OWNERS THAT
WERE RUNNING BUSINESSES IN THOSE
DAYS, THEY HAD TWO WEEKS NOTICE
AND TWO WEEKS LATER THEY DIDN'T
HAVE THEIR STAFF.
HOW CAN YOU RUN A BUSINESS LIKE
THAT?
>> Reporter: MACQUISTEN SAYS
TODAY HE'S CONCERNED ABOUT THE
POSITION OF THE CURRENT SPANISH
GOVERNMENT.
SPANISH PRIME MINISTER MARIANO
RAJOY HAS CALLED FOR JOINT
SOVEREIGNTY OVER GIBRALTAR.
IF GIBRALTAR WANTS TO REMAIN IN
THE E.U. AFTER BREXIT, SAYING
LAST DECEMBER, "IT'S IMPOSSIBLE
FOR GIBRALTAR TO BE IN THE
EUROPEAN UNION IF THE UNITED
KINGDOM LEAVES THE EUROPEAN
UNION AND IF THERE ARE NO LEGAL
CHANGES."
CHIEF MINISTER FABIAN PICARDO,
THE HIGHEST RANKING GOVERNMENT
OFFICIAL IN GIBRALTAR, SAYS
RESIDENTS OPPOSE SPANISH RULE OF
ANY KIND.
>> THERE'S ONLY ONE OPTION ON
THE TABLE AS FAR AS THE PEOPLE
OF GIBRALTAR ARE CONCERNED.
WE'RE GOING TO STAY ENTIRELY AND
EXCLUSIVELY BRITISH FOR EXACTLY
THE SAME REASON AS THE PEOPLE OF
THE UNITED STATES WOULD TODAY
NOT BE PREPARED TO COUNTENANCE
JOINT SOVEREIGNTY WITH CANADA OR
MEXICO.
>> Reporter: THE BRITISH
GOVERNMENT HAS ALREADY SAID IT
WON'T NEGOTIATE WITH SPAIN ON
SOVEREIGNTY OVER GIBRALTAR OR
CEDE GIBRALTAR TO SPAIN.
PICARDO ADVOCATES A SPECIAL
STATUS FOR GIBRALTAR WITH THE
EU, TO AT LEAST MAINTAIN FREEDOM
OF MOVEMENT FOR GOODS AND
PEOPLE.
>> GEOGRAPHICALLY, POLITICALLY,
AND SOCIO-ECONOMICALLY, WE HAVE
DIFFERENT REALITIES.
WE HAVE A LAND BORDER WITH THE
EUROPEAN CONTINENT.
THAT MEANS THAT THERE ARE GOING
TO HAVE TO BE SLIGHT DIFFERENCES
BETWEEN WHAT IS AGREED FOR US
AND WHAT MIGHT HAVE TO BE AGREED
FOR THE REST OF THE UNITED
KINGDOM.
>> Reporter: ECONOMICALLY,
GIBRALTAR HAS TOUTED ITS E.U.
ACCESS AND RELATIVELY LOW
CORPORATE TAXES TO LURE
INDUSTRIES THAT DON'T EXPORT
PHYSICAL PRODUCTS, LIKE
INSURANCE, FINANCIAL SERVICES
AND ONLINE BETTING COMPANIES.
NOW, SOME OF THOSE COMPANIES SAY
THEY'RE EXPLORING RELOCATING
OFFICES ELSEWHERE IN THE E.U.
AMIDST THE UNCERTAINTY OVER ITS
POLITICAL FUTURE, CHAMBER OF
COMMERCE PRESIDENT ED MACQUISTEN
SEES ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY.
>> WE'VE ALWAYS SOUGHT TO
DIVERSIFY OUR ECONOMY AND GET IT
TO DEVELOP IN VARIOUS DIFFERENT
WAYS SO YOU'RE NOT RELIANT ON
ANY SINGLE SECTOR.
IF ONE MARKET OR TWO MARKETS
SHUT DOWN, PEOPLE IN THIS TOWN
WILL GET UP AND GO OUT AND FIND
FIVE NEW MARKETS.
>> Reporter: EVEN WITH WELL
THOUGHT OUT PLANS, GEORGE
BASSADONE FEARS A HARDENED
BORDER WILL HURT HIS BOTTOM
LINE.
>> THESE CONTINGENCIES WOULD
COME WITH ADDITIONAL COSTS TO
THE BUSINESS, AND THOSE COSTS WE
WOULD NOT BE ABLE TO PASS ON TO
THE CUSTOMER.
WE'RE ALREADY PLAYING IN A
MARKET THAT'S VERY PRICE
SENSITIVE.
WE WOULD WANT THE FRONTIER TO
STAY OPEN TO ALLOW FOR THE
FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT OF GOODS AND
PERSONNEL FOR OUR BUSINESS
MOVING FORWARD.
>> Sreenivasan: NEW YORK CITY
MAYOR BILL DE BLASIO LAST WEEK
ENDORSED A PROPOSAL TO CLOSE THE
JAILS ON RIKERS ISLAND, WHICH
ARE NOTORIOUS FOR THEIR HISTORY
OF VIOLENCE AMONG INMATES AND
BRUTALITY AT THE HANDS OF
GUARDS.
THE FACILITY HAS BEEN THE
SUBJECT OF MULTIPLE
INVESTIGATIONS BY THE CITY AND
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT.
THE PLAN CALLS FOR RIKERS TO
CLOSE OVER THE NEXT DECADE AND
ITS 7,500 PRISONERS TO BE PLACED
IN NEW JAILS IN THE CITY'S FIVE
BOROUGHS.
JOINING ME NOW TO DISCUSS THE
FEASIBILITY OF ALL THIS IS"
CRAIN'S NEW YORK BUSINESS"
REPORTER ROSA GOLDENSOHN.
>> THIS IS A NATIONAL PROGRAM
BUT LIKERS IS A
NATIONALLY-- RIKERS IS A FAMOUS
JAIL.
>> THERE AREN'T A LOT OF ISLAND
PENAL COLONIES LEFT.
>> IT IS REALLY RARE AND IN THE
STUDY THAT JUST CAME OUT THEY
CALL IT A 19th CENTURY
SOLUTION TO A 21S CENTURY
PROBLEM.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT WERE THE
THINGS THAT ACTUALLY FINALLY
TIPPED IT OVER THE EDGE?
BECAUSE IT'S HAD A LONG HISTORY
OF PROBLEMS.
>> IT HAS.
AND I THINK THERE'S A CONSENSUS
THAT BUILT IN THE LAST YEAR,
THERE WAS A STORY ABOUT THE 16
YEAR OLD WHO SPENT THREE YEARS
ON REICH ARES AND LATER KILLED
HIMSELF A YEAR IN SOLITARY
CONFINEMENT.
AND THAT DREW A LOT OF ATTENTION
TO THE COURT DELAYS AND SORT OF
SYSTEMIC PROBLEMS THERE.
LIKE WHY, WHY ARE PEOPLE
SPENDING SO MUCH TIME THERE.
SO THAT STORY AND HIS DEATH IN
2015 DREW A DIFFERENT KIND OF
MOMENTUM.
"THE NEW YORK TIMES"
EDITORIALIZED THAT THE PLACE
SHOULD CLOSE LAST YEAR AND THE
SPEAKER OF THE CITY COUNCIL CAME
OUT SAYING THIS WAS HER GOAL.
>> HOW MUCH DOES IT ACTUALLY
MATTER IN TERMS OF THE MONEY
SPENT ON KEEPING PEOPLE ON THIS
ISLAND.
BECAUSE IT IS WHERE IT IS, IF
THE CRIMES ARE IN THE BOROUGHS
THEY HAVE TO KIND OF GO BACK AND
FORTH.
>> THAT IS RIGHT, $85 A DAY JUST
TRANSPORTING PEOPLE TO THE
COURTS AND BACK.
AND 85% OF THE PEOPLE ON RIKERS
ARE PRETRIAL DETAINEES, PEOPLE
WHO HAVE TO GO TO THE COURT.
THEY ARE NOT PEOPLE SERVING OUT
SENTENCES FOR MISDEMEANORS A LOT
OF PEOPLE THINK IT'S A PRISON,
IT'S A JAIL.
THEY SPEND A LOT OF MONEY
BRINGING PEOPLE BACK AND FORTH
TO THE COURTS.
ALSO THE PHYSICAL PLANT OF
RIKERS, JUST THE LAY OUT AND ITS
AGE, THE AGE OF THE BUILDING,
THE HEAD OF THE DEPARTMENT OF
CORRECTIONS HAS SAID IT'S THAT
PHYSICAL LAYOUT THAT ACTUALLY IS
WHAT MAKES THE STAFFING
REQUIREMENTS SO HIGH THERE.
SO THERE ARE 10,000 CORRECTION
OFFICERS FOR FEWER THAN 10,000
TOTAL INMATES IN THE SYSTEM.
>> ONE OF THE THINGS OF NEW YORK
CITY IS STRUGGLING WITH AND THIS
HAPPENS AROUND THE COUNTRY IS
THAT IF YOU CLOSE THIS DOWN,
WHERE ARE YOU GOING TO MOVE IT.
AND EVERYONE SAYS NOT IN MY
BACKYARD.
>> THE REPORT THAT CAME OUT
TODAY, WAS RELEASED FRIDAY,
ANNOUNCED TODAY CALLED FOR THE
FACILITIES TO BE NEAR THE
COURTS.
AND SO YOU KNOW, THERE ARE
ALREADY SOME HOLDING FACILITIES
LOOK BROOKLYN HOUSE OF
DETENTION, THE MANHATTAN, THE
TUNES.
SO THERE ARE JAILS NEXT TO THE
COURTS IN SOME OF THE BOROUGHS.
THIS WOULD HAVE TO BE BUILT OUT.
SO THERE COULD BE OPPOSITION BUT
IT'S NOT LIKE YOU'RE GOING TO
NEED TO HAVE A JAIL IN THE
MIDDLE OF A RESIDENTIAL
NEIGHBORHOOD ON YOUR BLOCK.
>> ALL RIGHT, ROSA GOLDSOHN FROM
CRANE'S NEW YORK BUSINESS.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR SUNDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: IN COLOMBIA,
PRESIDENT JUAN MANUEL SANTOS
SAYS THIS WEEKEND'S DEVASTATING
FLOODING AND MUDSLIDES KILLED
MORE THAN 200 PEOPLE IN THE CITY
OF MOCOA, NEAR THE COUNTRY'S
BORDER WITH ECUADOR.
MANY MORE ARE INJURED, HOMELESS,
OR MISSING, AS 1,000 COLOMBIAN
SOLDIERS HELP THE RESCUE
EFFORTS.
ITN'S NICK WALLIS HAS MORE.
>> Reporter: 24 HOURS AFTER TWO
WEEKS WORTH OF RAIN FELL IN ONE
NIGHT, THE WATERS IN MOCOA HAVE
SUBSIDED, BUT THE DEATH TOLL
CONTINUES TO RISE.
THE COLOMBIAN MILITARY HAVE BEEN
MOBILIZED TO FIND SURVIVORS.
THEY'RE ALSO CARRYING OUT THE
DEAD.
"I'M ALONE," SAYS ONE MAN.
"I'M LOOKING FOR MY CHILDREN,
BUT THEY HAVEN'T APPEARED."
THE NAMES OF THOSE FOUND ALIVE
OR KNOWN TO HAVE DIED ARE POSTED
ON A NOTICE BOARD IN THE CITY.
SOME CANNOT COPE.
COLOMBIA'S PRESIDENT JUAN MANUEL
>> (translated): WE WILL DO
EVERYTHING POSSIBLE TO HELP
FAMILIES, NOT ONLY TO HELP THE
FAMILIES WHO LOST THEIR LOVED
ONES BUT ALL OF THEM WHO LOST
THEIR HOMES.
>> Reporter: AS THE REGION'S
EMERGENCY SERVICES MAKE THEIR
WAY TOWARDS MACOA THE SCALE OF
THEIR TASK IS BECOMING CLEAR,
POWER LINES ARE DOWN, AND
BEWILDERED RESIDENTS TRY TO COME
TO TERMS WITH WHAT'S HAPPENED.
>> (translated): I CAME HERE
IN SEARCH OF FAMILY MEMBERS.
UNFORTUNATELY, I DO NOT HAVE ANY
NEWS ABOUT THEM.
I FEEL VERY SAD.
I CAN'T EXPRESS THE MAGNITUDE OF
THE LOSS HERE IN MOCOA.
>> Reporter: WHILST THE SEARCH
AND RESCUE OPERATION CONTINUES,
THE CLEAN UP BEGINS.
PEOPLE SALVAGING WHAT THEY CAN
FROM THE RAVAGES OF A NATURAL
DISASTER WHICH HAS COST SO MANY
LIVES.
WITH 200 PEOPLE STILL
UNACCOUNTED FOR, THE FEARS ARE
THAT THE DEATH TOLL WILL RISE
SIGNIFICANTLY IN THE COMING
DAYS.
NICK WALLIS, ITV NEWS.
>> Sreenivasan: ON "THE
NEWSHOUR" TOMORROW, A PROFILE OF
IVANKA TRUMP AND HER HUSBAND,
JARED KUSHNER, TWO OF THE TOP
ADVISERS IN THE WEST WING OF THE
WHITE HOUSE.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF"
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.